---
title: Write manageable code without over-engineering
category: Flutter
---

Basically manageable code refers a code which can be easily extended without having too much changes in many places. If our code-bases are well manageable we will have following well known advantages.

- New comers will be able to understand and add new features within a short period of time.
- Reduces git conflicts when the development team is large.
- New features can be easily added without modifying too many files or places.

Consider this very simple example

```js
let action1Clicked = () => {
  // some common logic same as action2Clicked
  // specific logic
};

let action2Clicked = () => {
  // some common logic same as action1Clicked
  // specific logic
};
```

We can clearly see there is a repetitive logic in both methods. Indeed, if we need to change the common logic we will have to modify two places. Therefore, let’s refactor it as per below.

```js
let commonLogic() => {
  // common logic goes here
}
let action1Clicked = () => {
  commonLogic();
  // some specific logic
}
let action2Clicked = () => {
  commonLogic();
  // some specific logic
}
```

So, are you satisfied or still thinking hard to move some specific logic which belongs to either action1Clicked or action2Clicked ? otherwise are you thinking to create separate class or module to move the common logic? If yes is the answer for second question, this article is exactly for you.

## Over-engineering

> Everything has a limit otherwise there will be bad side effects.

You may use nice breakdown of logic with either set of well linked classes or well linked modules according to your preference. Thus, you may wisely distribute each class’s or module’s responsibility in to multiple methods. Whereas, how about if we do it too much into a situation where there is no gain of doing it other than introducing an unwanted complexity.
If we draw a piece of straight line on a paper we could say left corner represents the worst case of code which is not manageable at all and also looking messy, thus right corner represents the most over-engineered garbage code which is also looking messy. Therefore, basically we need to balance our codebase’s quality in between those two edges according to what we are solving.
I would like to give you 3 principles you could take in to your mind for writing manageable but not over engineered code.

### 1. Get rid of the imaginary features dilemma

When a particular feature is being implemented there can be features which might be needed in future. Therefore, you may add more flexibility in your code by addling more classes/modules or methods.
Example:
Suppose an external API returns temperature in Celsius but you need to display values in Fahrenheit, simple utility function can be introduced to do the conversion before rendering. In other hand we could also introduce new modules/classes for entire temperature unit conversion by assuming that there will be more units in future. Whereas, neither external API nor your application will change its units in future. Somehow if users request Kelvin as a display unit it will be just another utility function.
Therefore, it is always better to identify what features are real and what features are imaginary before the implementation of a particular feature.

### 2. Controlling the level of decomposition

Decomposing logic into modules/classes or methods is very good whereas understanding the level of decomposition is also mandatory. A well decomposed and organized codebases usually has highly reusable components. But sometimes, atomic level of decomposition increases complexity of project for no ROI. Importantly, the level of decomposition clearly depends on what we are solving. For an instance it’s nice to have a bit deeper separation of logic when there obvious visible growth in currently planned level of separation or when non-separated elements show reusable use cases.
Example:
Suppose you are writing a CLI program and there is a command that will create a zip file using some existing files on disk. Someone may either create a module/class to handle this task or set of modules/classes for zip file, zipping files, writing a file to disk so on and on.. What if no one will reuse those set of things; there is no gain of doing it other than adding more complexity to the project.
This point also applies to the modern software architecture too; Nowadays, people tend to create hundreds of microservices for an application which only has hundreds of users simultaneously at maximum, ever.

### 3. Don’t overthink along with DRY

DRY(Don’t Repeat Yourself) is a good practice to reduce additional work by reusing existing things or writing more extendable code. Whereas everything cannot be converted into clean reusable elements.
Example:

```js filename=jsconfig.json
let someAlgorithm = (myParam_1.. MyParam_n) => {
// some logic
}
```

Let’s say you need to add another algorithm which looks same but there are many differences here and there according to parameters. It is true that writing anotherAlgorithm method is better than strictly reusing someAlgorithm with a lot conditional statements.

## Conclusion

Well engineered and managed code-base is good but make sure you are not over-engineering since it has more bad side-effects. Applying engineering principles to a problem should simplify it rather than over-complicating everything.
Happy coding! 🥳
